Israeli forces have surrounded several
hospitals in Northern Gaza the biggest
alifa says it has run out of fuel and is
now closed to new patients the Israeli
military says this video shows its
soldiers placing 300 lers of fuel near
alifa prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu
says Hamas refused to accept the fuel
the hospital director has denied that
and said the fuel would not have been
enough to power Hospital generators for
even an
hour the World Health Organization has
described the situation at alifa as dire
and perilous it says the hospital is
unable to function due to fighting
nearby and the number of patient deaths
has increased
significantly the Israel Hamas battle
intensified around hospitals in Northern
Gaza making conditions desperate for the
medical centers running out of essential
supplies and
electricity Samira Alor displaced family
fled the alifa hospital with her
children she described her experience at
the city's major health
facility we thought the hospital was
safe but it wasn't if we had stayed
another 5 minutes we would have been
killed they started to bomb us and we
ran away from alifa my son got injured
so I left him there in the hospital to
get treatment I couldn't take him with
me
I was tired and afraid I went to my
nephew and told him to stay with my son
and then we
fled several thousand displaced people
have sought shelter in
hospitals medical staff say hundreds of
patients are at risk including several
newborn babies and
incubators in an interview with DW the
un's World Health Organization expressed
alarm at the
situation we understand there are still
600 to 650 inpatients at alifa and
between 200 and 500 health workers um
there are 45 patients who really need
kidney dialysis but they can't get it
because the the powers run out and the
dialysis machines not working we're
certainly hearing that the health
workers don't feel they can leave that
they they don't feel they can leave
safely although many are also saying
they will they want to stay because
they've got so many vulnerable patients
that can't be moved as well
the Israeli military says its operation
is against
Hamas it says the islamist militant
group responsible for the October 7th
Terror attacks on Israel has a command
post inside and under the hospital
compound the Israel Defense Forces
denied that the hospital was under siege
and agreed to help evacuate babies from
gaza's Main Hospital
alifa although Samira has managed to
flee Aid organizations say that Israel's
instructions to leave the hospital
without any safe haven make it unfair
and impossible to evacuate especially
for the sick and vulnerable patients
trapped
inside for more let's bring in shanea
loow she works for the Norwegian Refugee
Council and is monitoring developments
from Jerusalem uh welcome back to DW
news uh we hear there are thousands of
people taking shelter in gaza's
hospitals how much Medical Care can
hospitals actually provide given these
kinds of
conditions you know day by day the
situation in gaza's hospitals are
getting worse lot many of the hospitals
have shut down Services completely or
operating uh with very little resources
we are uh hearing reports of doctors
running out of medicine running out of
fuel uh shortages of food clean water we
had a colleague over a week ago had to
go and find food for his um injured
cousin at a hospital in the middle area
which is which is ostensibly a bit safer
uh and it took him about 2 hours just to
find some biscuits uh so that the cousin
could take some medication that required
food uh doctors and medical personnel
are working under the most difficult of
circumstances trying to save lives uh
and and struggling to do so it's it's
our responsibility as the International
Community it's Israel's responsibility
as the occup in power controlling Gaza
to provide assistance including uh
medical supplies and medicines in order
to prevent unnecessary death and and
injury and just to make clear uh for our
viewers how is your organization able to
stay in touch with people in Gaza are
you able to uh speak to staff
there we are still in touch with most of
our staff on a daily basis we are
finding that our daily headcounts trying
to make sure that all of our staff is
accounted for are getting more and more
difficult as Communications become less
and less reliable uh we had one one
colleague Yousef told me yesterday that
another one of his colleagues uh tried
to call a hundred times before he was
able to get through as as the as
telecommunications system in Gaza is
extremely weakened we've heard reports
from from the major telecom companies
just in the last couple of days that
they anticipate that with running out of
fuel they will soon uh have have uh even
more difficulty keeping their operations
uh running so major communication
difficulties on top of everything else
going on I want to ask you about
something else we've mentioned earlier
in the show uh Israel's military says it
has placed 300 lers of fuel outside the
alifa hospital um but that Hamas has
then blocked the delivery the hospital
director has strongly denied that what
is your organization hearing regarding
the delivery of fuel
there you know we haven't we don't have
any folks at alifa um any longer so it's
very difficult for us to make
determinations uh in the fog of war and
and with competing narratives I'm not
really comfortable saying um speculating
on on what in fact is going on but it's
the responsibility of all parties to
ensure that International humanitarian
law is is abided by and and we hope we
implore that all parties are doing all
that they can to save the lives of
innocent civilians who are just caught
in the crossfire
and what about fuel needs and deliveries
more generally can you give us a sense
of what the situation is and how much is
actually available for hospitals to
operate you know the situation with fuel
is is um has been it's something we've
been warning about for weeks as fuel
supplies have run out I know that a
number of hospitals have had to shut
down uh due to lack of fuel it's not
just the hospitals it's it's also in
terms of us being able to provide
humanitarian response in our Partners
being able to provide a humanitarian
response without fuel getting into Gaza
it makes it impossible for trucks to be
able to go and deliver Aid to Across the
across Gaza uh and so we desperately
need fuel to be coming in not just to
run the generators in hospitals but to
run ovens and bakeries to wa water
desalination plants water pumps and of
course to be able to distribute Aid so
while we've seen a trickle of trucks Aid
trucks coming in there's been no fuel
entering Gaza for over a month it's
desperately needed and we call on the
International Community to continue to
push to allow for for fuel to go in in
order to save lives and provide uh the
assistance that people are so
desperately in need of Shana thank you
very much for speaking with us that is
Shaya loow with the Norwegian Refugee
Council and earlier our correspondent in
Jerusalem Rebecca ritters told me more
about what we have heard from the from
Israel on the situation
in gaza's
hospitals Israel is saying that it's not
targeting civilians that it's that it's
trying to crack down on this Hamas
Command Center that it says is
underneath the hospital we know that gun
battles have been going on outside the
hospital making it almost impossible for
people to leave we've been hearing
accounts of people trying to leave the
hospital being shot at and having to run
back sometimes then injured even further
so the situation for civilians on the
ground really really difficult Israel is
saying for people to get out of the
hospital but these gun battles are
making it almost impossible as I said
and I you we seeing that that Israel
saying that they want to open up that
they have opened up in fact on the
Eastern side of the hospital an Escape
Route an evacuation route but people
just too scared medical staff saying
that people are too sick too injured to
be able to be moved so the situation
just increasingly difficult we know that
the death toll uh that the Ministry of
Health Hamas uh LED Ministry of Health
releases hasn't been updated since
Friday because they simply can't get a
handle on the toll anymore they're not
able to get to places to to see who has
been killed in strikes and who has been
killed in this these gun battles so you
know the situation there shocking Israel
saying it's trying to give fuel to the
hospital but we we're seeing that Hamas
has apparently rejected that offer and
saying that it's not nearly enough to be
able to operate the hospital as you just
heard in that report Israel also
offering to evacuate babies but we
haven't seen any progress on that yet
now Rebecca looking at Southern Gaza the
Rafa border crossing to Egypt that's the
only Crossing out of Gaza not controlled
by Israel uh we understand that reopened
on Sunday uh and a few hundred people
managed to get out can you tell us a
little bit more about
that yeah we have confirmation from uh
the people who run the the the border
the authority there saying that more
than 800 people were able to get out
yesterday this has been after a few days
or several days of it being closed again
after it had reopened uh in sort of in
the more initial stages of the
bombardment and we saw uh a few thousand
people coming out it's it's thought that
around a little less than 3,000 a few a
little fewer than 3,000 people have
managed to cross in total and it's hoped
that more people will be able to
continue Crossing that border we're
talking about mainly foreign Nationals
though some Palestinians who have been
uh severely injured or that are s you
know suffering uh
serious health concerns have also been
able to cross though in fewer numbers uh
and you know there's obviously hope that
more people will be able to cross soon
but we have seen that that border
crossing then closed it opened it then
it closed again and now it's seeing
reopened so people hopeful that that
will continue and more people will be
able to evacuate and looking elsewhere I
also understand there were intensified
clashes on the Israeli Lebanese border
on Sunday how serious is the situation
there very serious CL serious and
getting more increasingly tense we heard
from hezb Hassan Nala a couple of days
ago a similar speech to one he gave you
know a week ago or so and it doesn't not
very content filled trying to I I think
say that they're keeping up the pressure
and yesterday we saw some of that
pressure we saw another two strikes at
least where we saw more than 20 people
injured on the Israeli side uh the hezb
claiming responsibility for those
attacks and now Israel uh stepping up
its counter attacks on targets inside
Southern Lebanon these have been
increasing we've been seeing this tit
fortat crossborder fire since the
beginning of this conflict and everybody
all the International Community uh US
President Joe Biden here to try and St
not at the moment but has visited and
all these other people trying to visit
to stop that becoming a wider regional
conflict but of course uh it is getting
really tense up there and Hass nraa
saying he's going to be keeping up the
pressure on uh Israel if only not
perhaps wanting to get really involved
and really start a bit broader conflict
but to try and keep Israeli troops uh
busy and and and keep their resources
tied up in the north our correspondent
Rebeca Ritter's in J bruum thank you so
much for that
update and Israel's prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has again dismissed
calls for a ceasefire unless it includes
the release of all the nearly 240
hostages captured by Hamas on October
7th Netanyahu told us media that Hamas
was to blame for the situation in
Gaza uh and I think every civilian death
every dead baby is a tragedy but that
tragedy should be placed squarely at the
responsibility of Hamas that is keeping
its military installations inside
hospitals its command posts inside
hospitals inside schools inside unra un
facilities and so
on let's bring in military analyst Frank
ledwich on on this issue Frank good to
see you again Israel has there alleged
that Hamas has command posts in and
underneath hospitals in Gaza is there
evidence for
this well good morning Claire I think
it's worth remembering that if you're a
pretty
ruthless islamist terror group there's
no better place to put your headquarters
or military positions in hospitals but
there we are uh in terms of evidence the
Israelis have been looking at this for
decades now probably about 20 years they
will have 20 years worth of
interrogation reports technical
surveillance satellite surveillance aial
surveillance agents on the ground who
will be reporting on this and if you
look at the quality of the uh
information provided provid you accept
it's in good faith I don't think there's
any reason for it not to be it does seem
that indeed Hamas has placed some of its
major installations underneath that
hospital now over the past few days uh
I've been speaking to to many doctors in
Gaza also to Aid workers who have staff
there and no one has mentioned or
confirmed uh the existence of any kind
of Hamas command centers in these
facilities do you think it is
conceivable that Hamas could be
operating there without anybody
realizing
it well with all due respect and to be
blunt about it I would invite you to
consider the consequences for anybody uh
stating to the media that there were
Hamas installations in such hospitals
this this is need to know stuff and uh
just by way of analogy I lived on a
military base for 4 years and I only
recently found out there was a big
nuclear bunker right underneath where I
worked I didn't need to know it was
there the hospital workers certainly
don't need to know it's there um this is
just a reality of of of the situation
however I did speak to someone uh there
quite a long time in Gaza who said it
was a common supposition but that of
course is rumor and it's not in any way
intelligence but these things are not
simply are simply not known to to to
most people although I think as I said
before the Israelis have some pretty
solid information on it so do you expect
uh Israeli troops to attempt to enter
alifa hospital at some point as part of
their military
operation I would suspect it's the very
last thing they want to do for very
obvious reasons but this will be a major
Target and I would expect them to deal
with it somehow they can be pretty
inventive in their operations the
Israeli the Israeli Defense Forces but
if it has to come to it they will do so
uh although I don't foresee firefights
in the hospital worth remembering by the
way that the last hold out of the
Islamic State in raaka was indeed
raqqa's Central Hospital so Hamas won't
mind doing
it well thank you so much for speaking
with us as always that's military
analyst Frank L
witch thank you
CL